Computational Thinking & AI Benchmark Test (Grade 6)
Instructions: Read each scenario carefully and choose the correct answer (A, B, C, or D). Answers and detailed explanations are provided after each question.
Section 1: Advanced Computational Thinking
Question 1
Scenario: A city planner wants to design a smart traffic control system to reduce morning gridlock across 50 intersections. Instead of programming the entire network at once, she breaks the project into distinct sub-problems: analyzing peak traffic times, writing an algorithm for individual light timers, and setting up communication between adjacent intersections.
Which Computational Thinking concept is being applied to handle this complex problem?
A) Abstraction
B) Decomposition
C) Data Encryption
D) Pattern Synthesis
Correct Answer: B) Decomposition
Explanation: Decomposition is the process of breaking a complex system or problem into smaller, isolated, and manageable parts to solve them individually before combining them.
Question 2
Scenario: An online streaming platform analyzes your viewing habits and notes that every time you watch a sci-fi movie on Friday night, you also play a retro video game on Saturday morning. It uses this recurring relationship to personalize your dashboard.
What core computational concept allows the system to make this connection?
A) Pattern Recognition
B) Hardware Calibration
C) De-abstraction
D) Recursion
Correct Answer: A) Pattern Recognition
Explanation: Pattern recognition involves finding trends, similarities, or repeated sequences within data sets to make predictions or decisions.
Question 3
Scenario: A software developer is building a flight simulator. To ensure the game runs smoothly, the developer programs realistic wind resistance and engine sound effects but ignores the specific color of the passengers' clothes inside the airplane.
Why did the developer intentionally exclude passenger clothing colors?
A) The developer ran out of storage space on the computer.
B) The developer applied abstraction to ignore non-essential details for flight simulation.
C) The graphics card had a bug in its rendering loop.
D) The algorithm failed to process passenger data.
Correct Answer: B) The developer applied abstraction to ignore non-essential details for flight simulation.
Explanation: Abstraction involves filtering out irrelevant details to focus strictly on the essential factors needed to model or solve a specific problem.
Question 4
Scenario: Consider the following pseudocode for converting temperature from Celsius to Fahrenheit:
INPUT Celsius Set Temp1 = Celsius * 1.8 Set Fahrenheit = Temp1 + 32 OUTPUT Fahrenheit
If the input value for Celsius is 20, what is the output value for Fahrenheit?
A) 52
B) 68
C) 72
D) 36
Correct Answer: B) 68
Explanation: Step 1: 20 × 1.8 = 36. Step 2: 36 + 32 = 68. The output value for Fahrenheit is 68.
Question 5
Scenario: A delivery drone follows this path instruction relative to its starting point facing East: Move Forward 5m -> Turn Left 90° -> Move Forward 4m -> Turn Left 90° -> Move Forward 5m.
Where is the drone relative to its starting position, and which direction is it currently facing?
A) 4m North of start, facing West
B) 5m East of start, facing South
C) 4m South of start, facing West
D) At the original starting point, facing North
Correct Answer: A) 4m North of start, facing West
Explanation: Starting facing East: 5m East takes it to (5,0). Turn Left 90° -> now facing North. 4m North takes it to (5,4). Turn Left 90° -> now facing West. 5m West moves it back along the X-axis to (0,4), which is 4m North of start, facing West.
Question 6
Scenario: Look at the following data pattern generated by a sensor network:
2, 5, 11, 23, 47, ___
What is the next number in this sequence, and what is the underlying rule?
A) 95; Multiply the previous number by 2 and add 1.
B) 94; Multiply the previous number by 2.
C) 70; Add 23 to the previous number.
D) 89; Add 42 to the previous number.
Correct Answer: A) 95; Multiply the previous number by 2 and add 1.
Explanation: Check the rule: (2 × 2) + 1 = 5; (5 × 2) + 1 = 11; (11 × 2) + 1 = 23; (23 × 2) + 1 = 47. Therefore, (47 × 2) + 1 = 95.
Question 7
Scenario: An automated security gate operates under the following logic:
IF (Valid ID Card) AND (NOT Restricted Hours) THEN Open Gate
Under which scenario will the gate open?
A) A person has a Valid ID Card during Restricted Hours.
B) A person has an Invalid ID Card outside of Restricted Hours.
C) A person has a Valid ID Card outside of Restricted Hours.
D) A person has no ID Card during Restricted Hours.
Correct Answer: C) A person has a Valid ID Card outside of Restricted Hours.
Explanation: The condition requires Valid ID Card to be TRUE and NOT Restricted Hours to be TRUE (meaning it is NOT restricted hours). Both conditions are met only in C.
Question 8
Scenario: A student writes code to calculate average grades. The program runs without crashing, but when inputs are 80 and 100, the output states the average is 130.
Set Sum = Mark1 + Mark2 * 0.5
What type of error is present in this code, and how should it be fixed?
A) Syntax Error; change Mark1 to a number.
B) Logic Error; use parentheses: (Mark1 + Mark2) / 2.
C) Hardware Error; replace the computer memory.
D) System Error; remove the variable Sum.
Correct Answer: B) Logic Error; use parentheses: (Mark1 + Mark2) / 2.
Explanation: Due to operator precedence (order of operations), Mark2 * 0.5 happens first (100 × 0.5 = 50), then adds 80 to get 130. To fix this logic error, add the marks first inside parentheses before dividing by 2.
Question 9
Scenario: Study the following nested loop pseudocode:
FOR i = 1 TO 3:     FOR j = 1 TO 2:         Print "X"     END FOR END FOR
How many times will the letter "X" be printed in total?
A) 3 times
B) 5 times
C) 6 times
D) 2 times
Correct Answer: C) 6 times
Explanation: The outer loop runs 3 times. For each iteration of the outer loop, the inner loop runs 2 times. Total executions = 3 × 2 = 6.
Question 10
Scenario: An algorithm searches for a specific student's ID number in an unsorted list of 1,000 students by checking each record one by one from top to bottom.
What is this search technique called, and what is its main drawback?
A) Binary Search; it requires the list to be sorted first.
B) Linear Search; it can be very slow if the item is at the end of a large list.
C) Random Search; it skips records unpredictably.
D) Bubble Search; it accidentally deletes records.
Correct Answer: B) Linear Search; it can be very slow if the item is at the end of a large list.
Explanation: Linear search checks items sequentially from beginning to end. Its primary disadvantage is inefficiency when searching large datasets if the target item is near the end or absent.
Question 11
Scenario: You are tasked with comparing two sorting algorithms, Algorithm X and Algorithm Y, using a dataset of 1,000,000 entries:
	•	Algorithm X: Takes O(n²) time, requiring roughly 1,000,000,000,000 steps.
	•	Algorithm Y: Takes O(n log n) time, requiring roughly 20,000,000 steps.
Which statement correctly compares their performance?
A) Algorithm X is better because larger step counts mean higher precision.
B) Algorithm Y is significantly more efficient for large datasets because it requires far fewer computational steps.
C) Both algorithms are identical in performance because they sort the same dataset.
D) Algorithm X should be chosen to maximize processor usage.
Correct Answer: B) Algorithm Y is significantly more efficient for large datasets because it requires far fewer computational steps.
Explanation: Algorithm efficiency measures how computational resource demands grow with input size. Algorithm Y scales far better, completing the task in a fraction of the steps.
Question 12
Scenario: A weather station collects temperature readings in Celsius every 10 minutes. A programmer writes a function toFahrenheit(c) that converts any temperature value passed to it and returns the result.
What is the primary benefit of using a parameter c inside this function?
A) It allows the function to accept different input values dynamically without rewriting code.
B) It stops the weather station from collecting duplicate data.
C) It automatically uploads data to the internet.
D) It speeds up physical sensor hardware.
Correct Answer: A) It allows the function to accept different input values dynamically without rewriting code.
Explanation: Parameters allow functions to receive dynamic inputs, enabling reusable and modular code across different data values.
Question 13
Scenario: A database contains a table of student test scores with columns: [Name, Grade, Score, Passed]. A teacher runs the following query filter:
WHERE Grade = 6 AND Score >= 80
Which students will be included in the results?
A) All 6th grade students regardless of score.
B) Any student in the school with a score of 80 or higher.
C) Only 6th grade students who scored 80 or higher.
D) 6th grade students who scored below 80.
Correct Answer: C) Only 6th grade students who scored 80 or higher.
Explanation: The AND condition mandates that both criteria (Grade equal to 6 AND Score greater than or equal to 80) must be satisfied simultaneously.
Section 2: Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning & Ethics
Question 14
Scenario: An e-commerce website groups its millions of customers into clusters based on purchasing habits without any prior labels provided by human operators. The computer discovers natural groupings on its own.
Which Machine Learning approach is being utilized?
A) Supervised Learning
B) Unsupervised Learning
C) Reinforced Debugging
D) Hardcoded Logic
Correct Answer: B) Unsupervised Learning
Explanation: Unsupervised learning algorithms analyze unlabeled datasets to discover hidden patterns, structures, or clusters without human guidance.
Question 15
Scenario: An AI model is trained to predict whether job applicants should be hired based on 20 years of historical company hiring records. Because the company historically hired mostly male engineers, the AI begins rejecting qualified female candidates.
What core problem in AI system development is demonstrated here?
A) Algorithmic speed degradation
B) Training Data Bias
C) Hardware incompatibility
D) Overfitting of real-time sensors
Correct Answer: B) Training Data Bias
Explanation: If historical training data reflects human biases or societal inequities, the AI model learns and perpetuates those exact biases in its decisions.
Question 16
Scenario: An autonomous rover on Mars learns to navigate rocky terrain. Every time it successfully avoids a boulder, it receives a positive mathematical score (+10). Every time it gets stuck, it receives a negative score (-50). Over time, it optimizes its path choices.
What type of Machine Learning model is this system using?
A) Reinforcement Learning
B) Supervised Classification
C) Manual Control Programming
D) Rule-based Deductive Reasoning
Correct Answer: A) Reinforcement Learning
Explanation: Reinforcement learning trains agents to make sequences of decisions by providing rewards for desirable behaviors and penalties for undesirable ones.
Question 17
Scenario: Medical researchers train an AI system on thousands of X-ray scans to identify early signs of lung illness. The system highlights tiny abnormal shadows that human doctors might overlook.
Which branch of Artificial Intelligence is primarily responsible for analyzing and processing medical X-ray images?
A) Natural Language Processing (NLP)
B) Computer Vision
C) Algorithmic Sound Processing
D) Automated Data Entry
Correct Answer: B) Computer Vision
Explanation: Computer Vision is the branch of AI focused on analyzing visual data (like photographs, video frames, or medical X-rays) to extract information and make classifications.
Question 18
Scenario: A student uses a Large Language Model (LLM) to summarize an encyclopedia article. The model generates a fluent response, but includes a claim that a famous inventor lived on the Moon in 1920—a completely fabricated fact.
What is this phenomenon called in AI text generation?
A) Data Compression
B) Hallucination
C) Overclocking
D) Syntax Compiling
Correct Answer: B) Hallucination
Explanation: An AI "hallucination" occurs when a generative model produces confident-sounding output that is factually incorrect or unsupported by real data.
Question 19
Scenario: You talk to a customer service agent online. You cannot tell whether you are speaking to a real human or an AI computer program. You administer a test by asking complex, conversational questions to determine if it possesses human-like responses.
What is this classic benchmark test called in computer science history?
A) The Turing Test
B) The Pascal Calculation
C) The Fibonacci Scale
D) The Boolean Truth Matrix
Correct Answer: A) The Turing Test
Explanation: Developed by Alan Turing in 1950, the Turing Test evaluates whether a machine can exhibit intelligent behavior equivalent to, or indistinguishable from, that of a human.
Question 20
Scenario: A mobile phone app uses facial recognition to unlock your device. To prevent someone from holding up a printed photo of your face to trick the phone, the AI system checks for subtle eye blinks and micro-depth shifts.
What type of AI feature extraction is being performed?
A) Static Pattern Matching
B) Liveness and 3D Depth Detection
C) Speech Synthesis Validation
D) Text Tokenization
Correct Answer: B) Liveness and 3D Depth Detection
Explanation: Liveness and depth detection analyze biological signals (like blinking) and 3D geometric contours to prevent spoofing using static 2D images.
Question 21
Scenario: Deepfake video technology uses generative neural networks to create realistic video clips of famous leaders saying things they never actually said in real life.
What is the primary societal concern associated with malicious deepfake technology?
A) It consumes too much device battery power.
B) It can spread misinformation and erode public trust in news and media.
C) It slows down download speeds for streaming platforms.
D) It renders older television screens unusable.
Correct Answer: B) It can spread misinformation and erode public trust in news and media.
Explanation: Malicious deepfakes create realistic synthetic media that can misinform audiences, impersonate individuals, and undermine trust in verified video evidence.
Question 22
Scenario: An AI model is designed to approve or deny loan applications. By law, the company must explain to applicants exactly *why* their application was denied. However, the AI model uses a complex neural network with billions of parameters that developers cannot easily trace or interpret.
This problem is commonly referred to as what in AI engineering?
A) The Open Source Dilemma
B) The Black Box Problem
C) Infinite Loop Stagnation
D) Hardware Bottlenecking
Correct Answer: B) The Black Box Problem
Explanation: The "Black Box" problem describes AI systems (especially deep neural networks) whose internal decision-making processes are too complex for human engineers to easily inspect or explain.
Question 23
Scenario: Consider a smart farm system that measures soil moisture, temperature, and sunlight levels using field devices, then passes this data to an AI model that controls automated watering valves.
Which hardware components represent the Input and Output of this system?
A) Input: Automated Valves; Output: Soil Moisture Sensors
B) Input: Soil Moisture & Temperature Sensors; Output: Automated Watering Valves
C) Input: Central Processor; Output: Battery Unit
D) Input: AI Model Code; Output: Wi-Fi Signal
Correct Answer: B) Input: Soil Moisture & Temperature Sensors; Output: Automated Watering Valves
Explanation: Sensors gather environmental signals (Input), while physical actuators like watering valves carry out actions based on processed decisions (Output).
Question 24
Scenario: A student feeds an entire copyrighted fantasy novel into a free AI tool and prompts it: "Write Chapter 26 continuing this exact book in the author's precise writing style."
What major intellectual property issue arises when using AI in this manner?
A) Copyright infringement and unauthorized use of protected creative works
B) Exceeding character count limits in the operating system
C) Invalid syntax formatting in text editors
D) Unintentional deletion of original files
Correct Answer: A) Copyright infringement and unauthorized use of protected creative works
Explanation: Using full copyrighted works without permission to train or generate derivative texts raises significant legal and ethical concerns regarding copyright and intellectual property rights.
Question 25
Scenario: A self-driving vehicle approaches a sudden, unavoidable obstacle in the road. Its control system must decide within milliseconds whether to swerve left into a bicycle lane or brake hard and risk a rear-end collision with a truck behind it.
What area of AI research studies how machine algorithms should be programmed to make decisions in critical safety situations?
A) Algorithmic Data Compression
B) Machine Ethics / Moral Machine Problems
C) Quantum Hardware Design
D) High-Frequency Network Topology
Correct Answer: B) Machine Ethics / Moral Machine Problems
Explanation: Machine ethics examines how to implement moral frameworks and safety priorities in autonomous systems that must navigate complex real-world dilemmas.
